welcome to topcast and now to part four
of my series on knowledge and ignorance
where we're going through Popper's
lecture on the sources of knowledge and
of ignorance and I provide some usually
lengthy expositions and commentary where
popper has been coming from and what
we've been talking about is the use of
observations in order to find some
knowledge about the world and the use of
rationality or our reason in order to
find out knowledge about the world but
looked at through the papyrian lens the
correct way of trying to figure out how
these things come together in order to
construct knowledge where we'll get to
today is the exciting part about
fallibalism how it is that we can
finally explain in part why it is that
despite having access to reality through
our observations or interpretations of
our observations and access to reality
through the use of our rationality our
capacity to reason about all of this
stuff that nonetheless we still managed
to make mistakes errors are everywhere
and so popper manages to reach this
place by standing on the shoulders of
philosophical Giants there are
antecedent ideas to his there are
predecessors in the philosophical
traditions to him and he is kind of
combining the best parts of the ideas of
the Ancients and the classics in order
to come up with an epistemology that is
unrivaled absolutely unrivaled when
looked at as a whole others take bits
and pieces of this and mash it together
and end up producing errors of their own
end up taking things in the wrong
direction end up not understanding how
it is that we can have knowledge and the
knowledge can be conjectural a model a
statement an explanation of reality
that's out there that is objective that
isn't going to be the final truth and
can always be improved this is all
accounted for in the work of Carl Poppa
and he's gradually unpacking this idea
for us throughout this lecture so far
we've explained the history of better
ideas in epistemology the better ideas
that papa says come to us from Britain
via people like bacon and the empiricist
notion that you yourself you can observe
stuff and come to know stuff and also
from the content of Europe places like
France and people like Descartes who
gave us the notion that we ourselves as
individuals we can learn by applying our
reason great stuff popper admits this
and I admit this too Geniuses both of
them and important
anti-authoritarian traditions in both
places grew up around these ideas but
also ultimately wrong it gave us
progress Beyond mysticism and purely
religious ideas progress beyond the
authority of Kings and Priests But
ultimately these ideas the empiricism of
Britain and the rationalism of the
Continental Europeans also leads to a
kind of authoritarianism popper today
gets through these guys bacon and
Descartes and manages to finally come to
fallibilism and its long history he he
traces it back to the pre-socratic
philosophers and chief among those is
xenophanese properly he's often called a
poet but really his works on
epistemology are famous among those who
have enjoyed popper over the years and
now of course they're being reignited so
to speak by people reading the beginning
of infinity by David Deutsch so it's
worth perhaps beginning today's episode
with that what is becoming I would say
famous quote from xenophonies and it
goes quote the gods did not reveal from
the beginning all things to us but in
the course of time through seeking we
may learn and know things better but as
for certain truth no man has known it
nor shall he know it neither of the Gods
nor yet of all the things of which I
speak for even if by chance he were to
utter the final truth he himself would
not know it for all is but a woven web
of gases end quote from xenophonies a
woven web of guesses that's not college
and of course that passage appears in
part in the beginning of infinity it is
of fundamental importance knowledge is
guest it is conjectural it consists of
our interpretations of the world and
indeed its interpretation all the way
down our observations well observations
are what our mind is doing in order to
interpret the goings on in the brain
these electrical crackles as David
Deutsch sometimes refers to them
neuronal firings in the brain that's
what our mind is trying to conjure into
knowledge via process we don't really
understand we just know that it's going
on we know that these neural firings are
going on and the mind is interpreting
these but where do the neural firings
come from well from other nerves that
are firing in the case of sight it's
because somewhere on the retinos
themselves have been excited and they've
sent signals down the optic nerve and
why have those cells been excited
because photons of Light have entered
the eye and all of this this long chain
of causation this explanation about what
site is applies has logs in all of our
other senses as well and these channels
of information are imperfect error prone
things can go wrong they can misfire and
we can never be sure we've never had a
misfiring at any time but through the
careful application of reason we can if
we're lucky correct some errors we can
sift some of the truth from some of the
falsity but never be sure about any of
it because again this is all a matter of
interpretation it's a matter of guessing
that what we're getting from our senses
in some way shape or form is providing
us accurate information but how can we
know that well we don't we have to have
theories our observations are Theory
later and we can explain what's going on
with observation but the explanations
themselves are liable to Improvement to
change to being refuted overturned over
time and this is what it means for our
observations to be theorylated which is
just to say it's just a special case of
a kind of guess that we have about the
world what our observations May mean
what they should mean what we think they
mean it is interpretations all the way
down from our ideas in our mind about
mathematics about which we think we're
certain our observations about the world
which we think we can't be in doubt
about it is all interpretation it's all
conjectural but not all interpretations
are equal no of course not there is such
a thing as better and worse
interpretations better and worse ideas
this is an objective matter it's not
like you've got your interpretation and
I have mine let's just call it a day
people do indeed interpret fossils as
for example evidence of Noah's flood or
some clever deception by God but the
correct interpretation is dinosaurs
that's what we know to be the case the
dinosaurs once walked the Earth and they
sank in mud piles and they got preserved
when those mud piles were turned into
rock over time leaving an imprint of
Bones that's how we know dinosaurs exist
but our ideas of about dinosaurs have
themselves evolved over time they have
changed they have improved at no point
do we say that's it it's all settled
that's the final truth about the
dinosaurs we understand everything about
dinosaurs here's a certainly true
statement about dinosaurs we can't know
this all we can know is that we have a
better exploration now than we have in
the past we've improved things we've
come to know things and the difference
as always between an interpretation that
invokes Superstition you know something
about the flood the great flood of Noah
explaining why the dinosaur fossils
appear where they do and the explanation
that well over 62 million years ago
there were these great beasts walking
the Earth and eventually they got wiped
out and some of them have been preserved
from well before that time up until that
time in these stratas of rock that we
can see beneath the Earth the difference
between the biblical ideas and the
scientific ideas is as always good
explanations but good explanations are
interpretations but good interpretations
good explanations there really is a
closer to reality interpretation a
better interpretation there really is
such a thing as accuracy like this is
true even in language better and worse
translations from one language into
another people know this we don't just
say well it's all interpretations if
you're interpreting from Spanish into
English world it's just your
interpretation no there is a better
interpretation a competent interpreter
is going to do a better job than someone
who doesn't understand Spanish at all
for example and so to in science anyone
can learn the method anyone can learn
how to go about error correction but
there is a difference between good
explanations good interpretations about
what the observations mean and what the
reasoning implies and terrible
interpretations or completely fictitious
and mythical interpretations but we
can't get away from this idea that it's
guesswork it's interpretation but of
course it's as I say more than Justice
it's not just pure a guesswork we are
checking and comparing against reality
observations one interpretation checked
against another kind of interpretation
it's just that we're not deriving these
interpretations reading them from the
so-called book of nature we're not
inducing them in the sense that people
like to say we use this method of
induction of repeated observations in
order to derive some kind of General law
we mentioned this last time in fact we
ended on this talking about how well
let's go to pop up this is where we
ended we talked about how Aristotle
talked about induction but he seemed to
mean two different kinds of things one
Papa said was a method by which we are
led to Intuit some general principle
that's what he said in the meno and the
other sense in which Aristotle uses this
was a method of educing this was
evidence positive evidence rather than
critical evidence or counter examples so
there in Aristotle we had this idea that
we could become more confident in
something because we gathered the
evidence up and it mounted up and it
became convincing at a certain point
rather than in the papyrian sense where
the evidence is critical ruling out
certain ideas as popper says quote the
first method seems to me to be the older
one and the one which can be better
connected with Socrates and his meiutic
method of criticism and counter examples
just by the way I'm going to be using
this word maiutic again and again as we
did in the last episode it means the
method of questioning the method of
questioning the Socratic method of
questioning that Socrates was famous for
using but even here there are kind of
two versions of Socrates that I will
come back to about whether or not this
method of questioning got us to some
certainly true ideas or whether or not
it Just revealed our ignorance and
enabled us along the way to construct
something like fallible knowledge or
incomplete knowledge or conjectural
knowledge call it what you like Papa
goes on to say about this these two two
forms of induction that were in
Aristotle he says quote the second
method seems to originate in the attempt
to systematize induction logically or as
Aristotle puts it to construct a valid
syllogism which Springs out of induction
this to be valid must of course be a
syllogism of perfect or complete
induction complete enumeration of
instances and ordinary induction in the
sense of the second method here
mentioned is just a weakened and invalid
form of this valid syllogism end quote
so there we have in Aristotle this
attempt as many have attempted over the
years people like Hume and all the way
through to the modern bayesians of
trying to systematize this method of
repeated observations into some way of
constructing certain knowledge or at
least knowledge that we are highly
confident in probably true and so on and
so forth popper also said there at the
end that Aristotle described Socrates by
saying both Socrates raised questions
but gave no answers for he confessed
that he did not know and then Papa goes
on to explain thus Socrates meiotic is
not an art that aims at teaching any
belief but one that aims at purging or
cleansing the soul of its false beliefs
its seeming knowledge its prejudices it
achieves this by teaching us to doubt
our own convictions fundamentally the
same procedure is part of Bacon's
induction and that brings us to today's
readings we are up to section 9 of on
the sources of knowledge and of
ignorance so let's go on and pop a
writes in this part quote the framework
of Bacon's theory of induction is this
he distinguishes in the novum organum
between a true method and a false method
his name for the true method
interpretation
is ordinarily translated by the phrase
interpretation of Nature and his name
for the false method anticipateo mentus
by anticipation of the Mind obvious as
these translations may seem they are not
adequate what bacon means by an
entrepreneurship nature is I suggest the
reading of or better still the spelling
out of the book of nature Galileo in a
famous passage of his IL sagittore of
which Mario bunge has kindly reminded me
speaks of that great book which lies
before our eyes I mean the universe and
we can compare this to Descartes
discourse end quote so their papa is
saying that when bacon appears to be
talking about interpretation as he does
in his Works he's really talking about
seeing the truth of the book of nature
it's not interpretation in the papyrian
sense the word actually seems to have
the completely opposite meaning to what
it does today back then this idea of
interpretation or the similar older word
that was used at the time means simply
reading simply reading the words from
the past age as popper explains better
than I can he goes on quote the term
interpretation has in Modern English a
decidedly subjectivist or relativist
tinge when we speak of Rudolph's circus
interpretation of the Emperor Concerto
we imply that there are different
interpretations but that this one is
circans end quite Rudolph Zircon was a
famous pianist who was famous for
particularly playing Beethoven stuff
really well Papa goes on to say of
riddle circum we do not of course wish
to imply that circans is not the best
the truest the nearest two Beethoven's
intentions but although we may be unable
to imagine but there is a better one by
using the term interpretation we imply
that there are other interpretations or
readings leaving the question open
whether some of these other readings may
or may not be equally true however he
used the word reading as a synonym for
interpretation not only because the two
meanings are so similar but but also
because reading and to read have
suffered a modification analogous to
that of interpretation and to interpret
except that in the case of reading both
meanings are still in full use in the
phrase I have just read John's letter we
have the ordinary non-subjectivist
meaning but I read this passage of
John's letter quite differently or
perhaps my reading of this passage is
very different that may illustrate a
subjectivist or relativist meaning of
the word reading I assert that the
meaning of interpret though not in the
sense of translate has changed in
exactly the same way except that the
original meaning perhaps reading aloud
for those who cannot read themselves has
been practically lost today even the
phrase the judge must interpret the law
means that he has a certain latitude in
interpreting it while in Bacon's time it
would have meant that the judge had a
duty to read the law as it stood and to
expand it and to apply it in the one and
only right way interpretato Juris or
ligus means either this or alternatively
the expanding of the law to the Layman
it leaves the legal interpreter no
latitude at any rate no more than would
be allowed to say a sworn interpreter
translating a French legal document end
quote so there we go this is the way in
which the language has changed over time
I should say I often go on about it
philosophy is not about debating the
meanings of words but this is not a
debate about the meanings of words but
that the substance of what people are
literally intending like what is their
Theory it's a little bit confusing
because we've got as I say we've got
interpret being used by bacon and
precisely the opposite way to the modern
meaning of the word or at least in some
Modern meanings of the word and so that
actually is a problem here for the
history of ideas pop it goes on thus the
translation the interpretation of nature
is misleading it should be replaced by
something like the true reading of
nature analogous to the true reading of
the law and I suggest that reading the
book of nature as it is or better still
spelling out the book of nature is what
bacon meant end quote so this is just
Papa speaking to other philosophers
Papa's saying that when bacon is talking
about interpretations of nature he's not
talking about well different ways in
which we can come to understand
scientifically reality no bacon is
saying there is no leeway for doing that
what we're doing is we're reading
directly we're getting knowledge
straight from nature your observations
guarantee perfect truth that's what he
means by interpretation that's the way
in which the word used to be used that's
why he says that interpret interpreting
nature should be regarded as again going
back quote spelling out the book of
nature that's what bacon meant going on
with Papa quote the point is that the
phrase should suggest the avoidance of
all interpretation in the modern sense
and it should not contain time more
especially any suggestion of an attempt
to interpret what is Manifest in nature
in the light of non-manifest causes or
of hypotheses for all this would be an
anticipated mentus in bacon sense it is
a mistake I think to ascribe to bacon
the teaching that hypotheses or
conjectures may result from his method
of induction for baconian induction
results in certain knowledge rather than
in conjecture now of course we know that
Papa doesn't think this so just for the
listener especially people who might be
new to this what pop is saying there is
that Bacon's version of induction is was
thought to result in certain knowledge
this is what it was intended to do but
popper doesn't believe this of course
probably does not endorse the idea of
certain Knowledge full stop pop is just
saying this is what bacon thinks this is
what other people who endorse a baconian
view of knowledge think and this is what
almost everyone who endorses some kind
of induction thinks except perhaps the
bayesians who only think it results in
not certain knowledge but probably
certain knowledge or something like that
but of course the idea that results in
knowledge that is true with some
probability well that claim is
apparently certain or is it if it's not
if there is some possibility of
bayesianism being completely wrong then
we've got fallibalism with some needless
assumptions about how to calculate the
probability of any claim whilst all the
while assuming it could always be false
that is to say strictly false with
probability one
anyway let's go on with what papa says
quote as to the meaning of anticipated
mentors we have only to quote lock quote
men give themselves up to the first
anticipations of their mind end quote
from conduct understanding pop it goes
on this is practically a translation
from bacon and it makes it amply clear
that anticipateo means Prejudice or even
Superstition we can also refer to the
phrase anticipateo deorum which means
harboring naive or primitive or
superstitious views about the gods but
to make matters still more obvious
Prejudice from Descartes also derives
from a legal term and according to the
Oxford English Dictionary it was bacon
who first introduced the verb to
Prejudice into the English language in
the sense of to judge adversely in
advance that is in violation of the
judge's Duty end quote in other words
for bacon there are only two
possibilities either you read from the
book of nature you believe your eyes and
ears as it were you believe they are
delivering you the truth and you cannot
be deceived in that way by carefully
observing so it's either that you've
either got all that or it's
superstitious nonsense it's Prejudice
it's a Prejudice of the mind it's pure
guesswork it's some kind of silliness
there's no middle ground see the truth
or be deceived but of course there is a
flip side to this so-called deception
this this wrong-headed view that will
bacon thinks it's a wrong-headed view
and the flip side of this is that
deception might be considered here to
just be hiding the truth okay that's
what we say when you know someone's
deceiving us they're hiding the truth
from us now of course deception of that
kind does have a pejorative sense in our
language but hiding the truth is just
what reality actually does we can't get
at the final truth it's veiled it is
there but it needs to be uncovered it
needs to be interpreted and by uncovered
I don't mean to finally reveal the final
truth the the the coverings are infinite
if you like it's not that some Prejudice
hides it or some greater Powers hiding
it it's merely that we ourselves are
fallible and cannot read the book of
nature directly so what else is there
for it but to to guess at it and then to
check in some way by careful attempts at
refutation by criticizing testing and
comparing and so on Papa goes on to say
quote thus the two methods are one the
spilling out of the open book of nature
leading to knowledge or episteme and two
the Prejudice of the mind that wrongly
prejudices and perhaps misjudges nature
leading to doxa or mere guesswork and to
the misreading of the book of nature
this latter method rejected by bacon is
in fact a method of interpretation in
the modern sense of the word it is the
method of conjecture or hypothesis a
method of which incidentally I happen to
be a convinced Advocate end quote so
there we have popper admitting he's a
papyrian he endorses the idea of method
of conjecture that it's guesswork that
what we're doing is constructing this
woven web of guesses and he goes on to
say quote how can we prepare ourselves
to read the book of nature properly or
truly Bacon's answer is by purging our
minds of all anticipations all
conjectures all guesses all prejudices
there are various things to be done in
order to so purge our minds we have to
get rid of all sorts of Idols or
generally held false beliefs for these
distort our observations but we have
also like Socrates to look out for all
sorts of counter instances by which to
destroy our prejudices concerning the
kind of thing whose true essence or
nature we wish to ascertain like
Socrates we must by purifying our
intellects prepare our souls to face the
Eternal Light of Essences or Natures
compare this to Saint Augustine's work
our impure prejudices must be exercised
by the invocation of counter instances
only after our souls have been cleansed
in this way may we begin the work of
spelling out diligently the open book of
nature the Manifest truth end quote and
I just thought is this not reminiscent
of the modern idea from psychology and
philosophy that if only you can rid
yourself of biases and things like the
list of logical fallacies then you will
not fall into error then you will be one
of the cleansed so to speak okay so they
don't use the word cleanse but educated
well-educated well-informed High
information rather than that dreaded low
information qualified perhaps qualified
to read the newspapers
this even happens in schools and
undergraduate University now you know
they do these courses on critical
thinking not to say that this is all
useless stuff it's not it's a useful
stuff but the the message sometimes is
well you're a special person now that
you've been through this course you've
got the special knowledge you've got the
keys to be able to unlock
understanding the newspaper better than
other people better than the man on the
street suddenly that man on the street
he's going to be filled with prejudices
and biases and he doesn't understand the
logical fallacies you now know what
straw man is you now know what argument
from Authority is you now know what an
homonym is you've got a list of logical
fallacies you remember the moth by heart
you are not going to fall into those
areas yourself now are you you're you've
been cleansed of the errors okay so this
is the modern version of this it's
either this or as I said last time some
of them maybe you can't cleanse yourself
from some of the biases and prejudices
maybe they're just there baked into your
jeans this is evolutionary psychology
that we are just condemned to make
certain errors condemned to be well
supposedly racist and sexist and all
sorts of horrible stuff like that it's
just there in our genes oh I often
wonder you know like does that mean that
the evolutionary psychologist who's
explaining these kind of biases that we
have that they themselves admit that
they must have those awful qualities
well presumably not presumably somehow
they have cleansed themselves in which
case well what does that say about
evolutionary psychology these ideas and
impulses we have can themselves be
changed they're just ideas they're just
parts of the mind that we can if we try
hard correct there are errors that we
can correct let's keep going purposes in
view of all this I suggest that baconian
and all also Aristotelian induction is
the same fundamentally as the socratic
meiutic that is to say the preparation
of the Mind by cleansing it of
prejudices in order to enable it to
recognize the Manifest truth or to read
the open book of nature Descartes method
of systematic doubt is also
fundamentally the same it is a method of
destroying all false prejudices of the
Mind in order to arrive at the
unshakable basis of self-evident Truth
end quote so there we go this is Papa
giving a master class in this idea
seeing the similarities of these
apparently disparate philosophies and
just going to the heart of the matter
well they're all kind of making the same
mistake surprisingly here perhaps even
Socrates is being thrown in with this
Socrates meiotic this method of
questioning because it depends on what
version of Socrates we're talking about
here because Socrates comes to us
filtered through the words of Plato and
so we don't get a consistent in view of
the character of Socrates sometimes he
used the consummate fallibleist and at
other times well this method of
questioning is supposed to lead you to
be able to distill out a final truth a
self-evident truth of some kind or other
you know you so he got most of the right
idea there but this method of
questioning doesn't leave you with some
final truth it just leaves you with
knowledge one hopes the correction of
Errors along the way and with Descartes
Descartes method of Doubt remember what
this is you know he's sitting there in
the meditations by the fire he's sipping
a little bit of wine he's a little bit
drowsy and he thinks well have I fallen
asleep am I now dreaming you know a
little bit too much wine a little bit
too drowsy I'm sitting by the fire is
the fire really there I can doubt
whether the fire is really there I might
be laying in my bed whoa if I'm able to
do that maybe I can doubt whether or not
my arms and legs are here maybe I can
doubt whether I have a body and so he
goes this method of Doubt until he's
left with but hold on something's doing
the doubting something's doing the
doubting that something is me my mind I
am I exist every time I think something
like specifically when I think this I
exist thing then I exist or I think I'm
trying to doubt that I exist and I exist
okay this is his method of Doubt but
this would mean that that idea this is
the one thing you can't doubt that you
exist why because presumably all the
error has been purged there's just no
way you could not you could not be in
possession of this truth that you exist
or as I like to put it and many people
are now in the position of saying I just
can't imagine how it is that while I'm
having this thought that I exist then
how could I possibly not exist I I can't
imagine it
but as I like to say one's lack of
imagination is not a proof if it's a
proof of anything it's a proof that one
is indeed fallible
it's not a proof that you're infallible
on anything at all your lack of
imagination one's inability to imagine
how things might possibly be otherwise
mainly that you could be mistaken that's
a lack of imagination that's just your
fallible mind not being able to do
something namely imagine the possibility
that it could be wrong
so you're not proving your infallibility
on the fact that you exist at all but
it's a minor thing anyway it's an edge
case I know some people want to have
this this one point it's almost like you
know Archimedes wanting one place in the
universe where if only you could have it
he could move the Earth some people
philosophically want that thing they
need that one thing I've got I've got to
have this one thing that I'm absolutely
certain about and then I can build all
the other knowledge and then everything
else can follow from that somehow like
dominoes it'll all just fall down and I
can be certain of everything and then I
can go around telling everyone that I've
got the certain don't worry about that
just worry about having good
explanations or not okay worry about
being able to find errors and correct
them where you can don't go down the
Silly Road of trying to be certain about
things be absolutely sure about things
that way lies dogmatism and that way
lies tyranny let's keep on going Papa
goes on we can now see more clearly how
in this optimistic epistemology by the
way what's the optimistic epistemology
the idea that we can get to this self
evident certain truth and we can
recognize it as such okay so we can now
see more clearly how in this optimistic
epistemology the state of knowledge is
the natural or the pure state of man the
state of the innocent eye which can see
the truth while the state of ignorance
has its source in the injury suffered by
the innocent eye in man's Fall From
Grace an injury which can be partially
healed by a course of purification and
we can see more clearly why this
epistemology not only in Descartes but
also in Bacon's form remains essentially
a religious Doctrine in which the source
of all knowledge is divine Authority end
quote now that's something that really
upsets atheists and rationalists
especially the rationalist atheists of
course
that this notion that still a religious
idea this idea that you believe in the
Manifest truth in some way shape or form
in a sense it's still this Divine idea
that certain species of knowledge are
absolutely certain you can't be wrong
about it and there's a way of perceiving
it and not urring okay not being an
error or at least of being highly
confident and being right about how
confident you are you get to a certain
point where you're super highly
confident next to certain or perhaps
certain in either case it's all feelings
anyway of course it's being confident
being certain this is not a standard for
objective knowledge as I've said
countless times before whether you've
got the Divine Authority or whether
you've got the authority of science or
whether you've got the authority of the
experts or whether you've got the
authority of peer-reviewed journals it
doesn't matter it's all the same error
okay there's this way of trying to
validate knowledge is incorrect we need
to replace as papa says the question of
our sources of knowledge therefore this
authoritarian idea with how to correct
errors how to come to identify and
correct errors that's the way in which
we make progress not trying to say
here's my authoritative Source now we
can be sure we've made progress popper
goes on quote one might say that
encouraged by the Divine Essences or
Divine Natures of Plato and by the
traditional Greek opposition between the
truthfulness of Nature and the
deceitfulness of man-made convention
bacon substitutes and here's
epistemology nature for God this may be
the reason why we have to purify
ourselves before we may approach the
goddess Natura when we have purified our
minds even our sometimes unreliable
senses held by Plato to be hopelessly
impure will be pure the sources of
knowledge must be kept pure because any
impurity may become a source of
ignorance end quote isn't that beautiful
so this idea here that popper is
explaining is that what we're doing as
people in reality would be regarded by
bacon and these other epistemologies as
being impure that you introduce some
sort of error into your knowledge and
therefore it can't be knowledge because
the knowledge has to be true but this is
just all wrong knowledge does contain
error and that doesn't prevent it from
being Knowledge from being the useful
information the information that gets
copied and the information that is
actually a statement about reality
though not finally true it tells you
something it tells you something
accurate about the world around you or
coming to understand it genuinely coming
to understand it what's going on in your
mind comes to more closely resemble what
is actually out there in the universe so
long as you are following this method of
error correction as long as you're not
falling into dogmatism which is
something you have to try and guard
against but the dogmatism begins in the
Tyranny begins in this idea that you are
observing the truth in some way or you
have reasoned your way to the truth the
final truth so these are the ideas that
come to us from bacon and daycare but
but as a virtue in the ideas this idea
that observation is important of course
and that reason and rationality are
important of course there are virtues in
this as Papa goes on to say in part 10
we're up to now quote in spite of the
religious character of their
epistemologies bacons and Descartes
attacks upon Prejudice and upon
traditional beliefs which we carelessly
or recklessly Harbor are clearly
anti-authoritarian and
anti-traditionalist for they require us
to shed all beliefs except those whose
truth we have perceived ourselves and
their attacks were certainly intended to
be attacks upon Authority and tradition
they were part of the war against
Authority which it was the fashion of
the time to wage the war against the
authority of Aristotle and the tradition
of the schools men do not need such
authorities if they can perceive the
truth themselves end quote so that's
this is great stuff I sometimes wonder
today given the way some academics speak
is if it's it's true for me but not for
thee you know like the academics and
intellectuals seem to think well we are
liberated from the authority of
superstition and higher powers and so on
we are liberated from needing to defer
to other people but not everyone else is
to everyone else we are now the
authority until perhaps such time comes
that the others are properly educated by
us of course
whatever did bacon and Descartes
actually succeed though in liberating
Knowledge from Authority well we can
actually ask Papa that question and in
the asking he will give us another one
of those breathtakingly beautiful
answers because he goes on to say quote
but I do not think that bacon and
Descartes succeeded in freeing their
epistemologies from Authority not so
much because they appealed to religious
authority to Nature or to God but for an
even deeper reason in spite of their
individualistic Tendencies they did not
dare appeal to our critical judgment to
your judgment all to mine perhaps
because they felt that this might lead
to subjectivism and to arbitrariness yet
whatever the reason may have been they
certainly were unable to give up
thinking in terms of authority much as
they wanted to do so they could only
replace one Authority that of Aristotle
and the Bible by another each of them
appealed to a new Authority the one to
the authority of the senses and the
other to the authority of the intellect
this means that they fail to solve the
great problem how can we admit that our
knowledge is a human and All Too Human
Affair without at the same time implying
that it is all individual whim and
arbitrariness yet this problem had been
seen and solved long ago first it
appears by xenophonies and then by
Democritus and by Socrates the Socrates
of the apology rather than of The Minnow
the solution lies in the realization
that all of us may and often do ER
singly and collectively but that this
very idea of error and human fallibility
involves another one the idea of
objective truth the standard which we
may fall short of thus the doctrine of
fallibility should not be regarded as
part of a pessimistic epistemology this
Doctrine implies that we may seek for
Truth for objective truth though more
often than not we may miss it by a wide
margin and it implies that if we respect
truth we must search for it by
persistently searching for our Errors By
in the fatigable rational criticism and
self-criticism end quote there we go
breathtakingly beautiful philosophical
passage fallibleism the notion we can
always be mistaken it's just the idea
that because of the possibility of being
mistaken of being an error then
therefore we can with some effort
correct errors and make progress which
is to say create knowledge we can come
to know reality better we don't reach
the truth but in coming closer to
reality we are able to find some truth
Sometimes some objective truth in our
objective knowledge we just need to be
in the fatigable in engaging in rational
criticism as papa says there be
persistent in searching for errors it is
that which is the road to knowledge not
the Royal Road to truth but rather the
road not yet built towards understanding
the road we built Brick by Brick and
rather often going back and ripping up
the pavers and replacing them with
something better all bricks on our
non-royal road are imperfect and it's
always incomplete and we cannot possibly
predict where it's going to go next all
we know is that we're making progress
we're building this road the road to
somewhere better popper goes on quote
Erasmus of Rotterdam attempted to revive
this Socratic Doctrine the important
though unobtrusive Doctrine know thyself
and thus admit to thyself how little
thou knowest yet this Doctrine was Swept
Away by the belief that truth is
Manifest and by the new self-assurance
exemplified and taught in different ways
by Luther bacon and Descartes it is
important to realize in this connection
the difference between Cartesian doubt
and the doubt of Socrates or Erasmus or
montane while Socrates he's doubts human
knowledge or wisdom and remains firm in
his rejection of any pretension to
knowledge or wisdom Descartes doubts
everything but only to end up with the
possession of absolutely certain
knowledge for he finds that his
Universal doubt would lead him to doubt
the truthfulness of God which is absurd
having proved that Universal doubt is
absurd he concludes that we can know
securely that we can be wise by
distinguishing in the natural light of
Reason between clear and distinct ideas
who source is God and all the others
whose source is our own impure
imagination end quote so on Descartes
view we've got access to God through our
divine souls and this guarantees that
when we clearly and distinctly perceive
something with the light of reason then
we have the truth we have become
invaluable you can be sure in certain or
whatever other term you like for being
in the state of inerrent knowledge one
version of Socrates seems to have
endorsed something like this with his
so-called meiutic method of questioning
that will end up getting you to the
truth or at least never giving you the
possibility of actual knowledge but of
course we know this isn't quite right we
can get to knowledge because knowledge
isn't about getting to certain truth and
as I as I've already said we have these
kind of two versions these various
versions of Socrates actually filtered
to us through the work of Plato Plato
constructing this character of Socrates
because in other moods Socrates is the
consummate fallibleist as Papa goes on
to explain quote Cartesian doubt as we
see is merely a meiutic instrument for
establishing a Criterion of Truth and
with it a way to secure knowledge and
wisdom yet for the Socrates of the
apology wisdom consisted in the
awareness of our limitations in knowing
how little we know every one of us end
quote and that I like to think of as the
real Socrates of course that's just a
matter of taste but Socrates like
xenophanese seems to me was wise on
matters of epistemology they knew
knowledge was indeed possible it just
could not ever be guaranteed true and
indeed the impulse to search for
guarantees much less think one has a
guarantee was the danger fallibalism
helped avoid the danger and promote a
more humanistic philosophy others got
there as well just as Papa goes on to
explain quote it was this doctrine of an
essential human fallibility which
Nicholas of Kusa and Erasmus of
Rotterdam who refers to Socrates revived
and it was this humanist Doctrine in
contradistinction to the optimistic
Doctrine on which Milton relied the
doctrine that the truth will prevail
which Nicholas and Erasmus montane and
lock and Voltaire followed by John
Stuart Mill and Bertrand Russell made
the basis of the doctrine of Tolerance
what is tolerance asks Voltaire in his
philosophical dictionary and he answers
quote from Voltaire it is a necessary
consequence of our Humanity we are all
fallible and prone to error let us then
pardon each other's Folly this is the
first principle of natural right end
quote from Voltaire Papa goes on more
recently the doctrine of fallibility has
been made the basis of a theory of
political Freedom that is freedom from
coercion see Hayek the constitution of
Liberty end quote and that's where we'll
end it for today but there we have Papa
talking about fallibalism ultimately
once we have in hand the idea that yes
there is virtue in empiricism once we
have yes this idea coming from
empiricism the observations of the real
world are important they're going to
allow us to distinguish between theories
guests and of course the use of our
reason the careful application of error
correction is going to help us in this
construction of this thing called
knowledge and ultimately bringing these
things together under a fallibalism
framework this idea that we can always
be an error and it's by correcting the
errors that we make progress is what
lies at the heart of humanist doctrines
these ideas around tolerance for other
people pardoning each other's Folly as
Voltaire says there and this idea that
we should be free from coercion why
because we can all make mistakes you
shouldn't be coercing someone else
because you could be an error you are
fallible as is everyone else this is the
basis in Hayek's philosophy of as
explained in his work about Liberty what
a deeply optimistic idea and a deeply
powerful idea a deeply fundamental idea
fundamental idea for philosophy science
politics humanity and progress of course
well I don't think I can top what popper
has said so far today so we're getting
up to part 11. so I think we'll leave it
here today and we'll pick it up again it
just seems to keep getting better and
better doesn't it does this work by papa
is just I've used the word a few times a
breathtaking example of good
philosophical writing of giving you a
master class in this history of ideas
and how it is that we've ended up in the
optimistic place that we are this of
course is kind of the launching pad for
David Deutsch and the ideas in the
beginning of infinity in the fabric of
reality these ideas that coercion is
unnecessary and indeed morally abhorrent
there's no virtuous application of
coercion against someone it is the
perfect way of stunting progress of
eliminating knowledge creation because
you're coercing someone when you think
you certainly have the right idea but
you're Arab you're fallible and if we
can all Embrace a little bit more
fallibalism while also endorsing the
idea that we can possess objective
knowledge okay error containing though
it is then tolerance and progress can be
allowed to flourish to a far greater
degree perhaps we're at a good place can
always move to a better place until next
time bye-bye
foreign
[Music]